# Practice Problem 2.35

You are given the assignment to develop code for a function tmult_ok that will
determine whether two arguments can be multiplied without causing overflow.
Here is your solution:

```c
/* Determine whether arguments can be multiplied without overflow */
int tmult_ok(int x, int y) {
    int p = x*y;
    /* Either x is zero, or dividing p by x gives y */
    return !x || p/x == y;
}
```
You test this code for a number of values of `x` and `y`, and it seems to work properly. Your coworker challenges you, saying, "If I can’t use subtraction to test whether addition has overflowed (see Problem 2.31), then how can you use division to test whether multiplication has overflowed?"

Devise a mathematical justification of your approach, along the following lines. First, argue that the case x = 0 is handled correctly. Otherwise, consider $w$-bit numbers $x$ ($x \neq 0$), $y$, $p$, and $q$, where $p$ is the result of performing two’s-complement multiplication on $x$ and $y$, and $q$ is the result of dividing $p$ by $x$.

1. Show that $x \cdot y$, the integer product of $x$ and $y$, can be written in the form $x \cdot y = p + t2^w$, where $t \neq 0$ if and only if the computation of $p$ overflows.
2. Show that $p$ can be written in the form $p = x \cdot q + r$, where $|r| < |x|$.
3. Show that $q = y$ if and only if $r = t = 0$.

## Answer

1. Zero is handled correctly: multiplication of any number by zero gives zero, which is representable without overflow. For two's-complement multiplication: $x \cdot y = (x \cdot y) \mod 2^w$. This can be rewritten as $x \cdot y = p + 2w + 2w + ... + 2w = p + t2^w$ because it implies the difference betwen the left and right sides is quantized to a multiple of $2^w$. When $t = 0$, $p = x \dot y$ and there is no overflow. When $t \neq 0$, $x \cdot y \neq p$ and there is overflow.
2. Sicne $q = p / x$, then there is a remainder $r$ such that $p = x \cdot q + r$, where $|r| < |x|$ by definition (the remainder cannot be bigger than the divisor). The book notes the signs may differ: $-7/2 = -3 \cdot 2 - 1$ has $x = 2, q = $-3, r = -1$.
3. If $q = y$, $x \cdot y = x \cdot y + r + t2^w$ by substitution. Since $|r| < |x| \le 2^w$ ($x$ must be representable in $w$ bits), this can only hold for $r = t = 0$. If $r = t = 0$, then $x \cdot y = x \cdot q$, and therefore $y = q$, so $q = y$ and $r = t = 0$ mutually imply each other. 
