# Practice Problem 2.46

The imprecision of floating-point arithmetic can have disastrous effects. On February 25, 1991, during the first Gulf War, an American Patriot Missile battery in Dharan, Saudi Arabia, failed to intercept an incoming Iraqi Scud missile. The Scud struck an American Army barracks and killed 28 soldiers. The US General

Accounting Office (GAO) conducted a detailed analysis of the failure [76] and determined that the underlying cause was an imprecision in a numeric calculation. In this exercise, you will reproduce part of the GAO’s analysis. The Patriot system contains an internal clock, implemented as a counter that is incremented every 0.1 seconds. To determine the time in seconds, the program would multiply the value of this counter by a 24-bit quantity that was a fractional binary approximation to $\frac{1}{10}$ . In particular, the binary representation of $\frac{1}{10}$ is the nonterminating sequence $0.000110011[0011]..._2$, where the portion in brackets is repeated indefinitely. The program approximated 0.1, as a value x, by considering just the first 23 bits of the sequence to the right of the binary point: x = 0.00011001100110011001100. (See Problem 2.51 for a discussion of how they could have approximated 0.1 more precisely.)

## A

What is the binary representation of $0.1 - x$?

### Answer

The [0011] repeats: $0.00000000000000000000000[1100]...$

## B

What is the approximate decimal value of $0.1 - x$?

### Answer

The above value is [1100] right shifted 23 times (it has 23 leading zeroes); this is multiplication by $2^-{23}$. We can approximate this as $x * 2^{-20}$, since it has three leading zeroes. Thus $0.1 - x \approx 0.1 * 2^{-20} \approx 9.54 * 10^{-8}$

## C

The clock starts at 0 when the system is first powered up and keeps counting up from there. In this case, the system had been running for around 100 hours. What was the difference between the actual time and the time computed by the software?

### Answer

The approximate error gets applied every 0.1s, so for 100 hours: $100 * 60 * 60 * 10 * 9.54 * 10^{-8} \aprox 0.343 seconds$

## D

The system predicts where an incoming missile will appear based on its velocity and the time of the last radar detection. Given that a Scud travels at around 2,000 meters per second, how far off was its prediction?

### Answer

$2000 \frac{m}{s} * 0.343 s \approx 687 m$
